The Project Gutenberg EBook of Up in the garret, by Robin Ranger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Up in the garret

Author: Robin Ranger

Release Date: August 26, 2020 [EBook #63049]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UP IN THE GARRET ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Tom Cosmas and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









Transcriber Note

Emphasis is denoted by _Italics_ and =Bold=.




[Illustration: Having a good time in the Garret.

                                                See page 38.
]




                            UP IN THE GARRET.

                             By ROBIN RANGER.


                        SUNDAY-SCHOOL DEPARTMENT,
                           805 Broadway, N. Y.


        Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1862, by

                            CARLTON & PORTER,

      in the Clerk's Office the District Court of the United States
                  for the Southern District of New York.




              CONTENTS.


  Chapter                            Page

    I. How the Garret looked            7

   II. The Little Bondies              16

  III. Fine times up stairs            22

   IV. Somebody comes to see them      35

    V. The Swallow Story               44

   VI. Coming down from the Garret     49




UP IN THE GARRET.




CHAPTER I.

HOW THE GARRET LOOKED.


The house in which Mr. Bondy lives is large and roomy. It stands on a
knoll or little hill, and has green grass and bright pretty flowers all
around it. There are also trees, some for shade and some for fruit.

But it is not about the house or the garden that I wish to tell you now.
You may laugh when I say that I want to talk to you about the GARRET of
the house.

"O, Mr. Robin Ranger," say you, "what is there about the garret that will
make a pleasant story for me to read? Don't the rats and mice live in the
garret? It is not a nice place: cold in winter, and hot in summer."

But stop a moment, Master Flurry, (if that is your name.) Isn't there a
garret to your house? And don't you go there sometimes to play, or to
find something that has been put in the rag bag? If you do not, I think
your sister does, and you may call her, if you think you do not want to
read about a garret, and see if she will not like it.

But I suppose that as you have read so far, you think you may as well go
on and find out what the story is about.

Mr. Bondy's garret was quite large. It had four small windows in it, two
at each end, so that there was plenty of light. There was also a chimney
between each pair of windows.

On the floor of the garret there was a little of everything: old
bedsteads and chairs waiting to be mended; trunks, valises, and
carpet-bags ready for traveling; rolls of spare carpet, matting, and oil
cloth; two or three stoves, put out of sight for the summer; hats in
bandboxes, and boots without any boxes; rag bags, and bags without any
rags.

Yet there was no disorder on the floor. Mrs. Bondy was a neat and careful
woman, and she had everything in her house, even in the garret, put in
order and kept so. Her motto was, "A place for everything, and everything
in its place." Hence the floor of the garret was kept clean, and the
various things I have named were stowed away where they might be found
when wanted.

There was a rope stretched across one end of the garret, and on this rope
were hung old clothes to be given to the poor, and winter clothes not now
in use. Nails were also driven into the rafters, which, I suppose you
know, are the beams or long pieces of wood just under the roof. From these
nails there hung little bundles of last year's herbs: mint, sage, thyme,
catnip, pennyroyal, and summer savory. These gave to the garret a very
pleasant smell.

Against one of the chimneys there stood a set of shelves which had once
been used in the kitchen; but when the kitchen was made larger, new
shelves were put in, and these old ones were sent up garret, where old
papers and books were piled on them.

I must not forget to tell you that on and under an old table with a
broken leg there were some toys: dolls, some with broken heads, and some
with broken arms; toy cats that couldn't squeak, and dogs that had long
ceased to bark; a company of soldiers that had once been able to stand up
together, but now looked as if they had been in the wars. The captain had
lost his head, and most of the men had lost either an arm or a leg.

There was also a little cradle with one rocker off, and a small cart with
only one wheel. There was a Noah's ark that had once been filled with
animals and with Noah's family--wooden animals and wooden people; but the
lid of the ark was gone, as though a great wind had blown it away, and the
animals and people were scattered, with broken limbs and heads, about the
floor.

These toys had been nice and new once, but they had been used as all other
toys are, and did not long stand the wear and tear of young hands. They
were still good enough to play with once in a while, and thus were put up
in the garret, while the newer and better toys were kept below, some in
the nursery and a few in the parlor.

And now you begin to think there must be some children in Mr. Bondy's
house, for he and his good wife would not play with dolls, and toy cats,
and wooden soldiers.

And you are right. There were children there, and I am glad of it, because
a house without any children in it is too dull and quiet, and is not as
pleasant as a house in which are the pattering of little feet, and the
laughter of merry little hearts, and the smiles of happy little faces. A
house without children is like a garden without buds.

If you want to know something of these children, read the next chapter.




CHAPTER II.

THE LITTLE BONDIES.


There were three of them. Alice, Maggie, and James were their names, and
they were generally well-behaved and kind to each other. This they were
taught to be by their parents.

Alice was ten years old and went to school. So did Maggie, who was three
years younger. But James, who was only four years old, was too young to go
to school, though he had learned a few of his letters from his sisters.

If I should say that these three little Bondies loved to play, you would
not think it strange, would you? Play! Why, I should not like to see
children that did not love to play. I should think they were sick, or else
had lost some of their senses.

I have seen children that did not love to work or to study, but I never
yet saw one that did not love to play. I should as soon expect to see a
squirrel that couldn't jump, or a bird that couldn't fly, or a mouse that
couldn't run.

Yes, they loved to play; and I ought to say just here that they were
willing to work and to study as far as they could. Alice and Maggie tried
hard to get their lessons for school, and even little James would have
studied his spelling-book if his father had not thought him too young.

Alice sometimes helped her mother work in the kitchen, and Maggie thought
she did the same, but I don't think her help amounted to much. Master
Jimmy loved to work, also. But his work made more work for older folks. So
his father thought one day, when he came home and found the young beets
and parsnips all pulled out of their beds in the garden.

"Who did that?" said he to the children.

"I did, papa," said little James.

"And what did you do that for?"

"_I was working in the garden!_" was the little fellow's reply.

He thought he was helping his papa. What do you think?

The children had a very good place to play in, for the garden was large,
and there was a good sized plot of grass; and, besides, not very far from
the house there was a grove of beautiful maple-trees, under the shade of
which they sometimes had a picnic.

But when it rained they could not play in the garden, or on the grass, or
under the trees. They had to stay in the house.

Then it was that the garret was used. It was a good place to play in on a
rainy day in summer. In winter it was too cold.

At such times the children took some of their good toys with them from the
nursery, and used them with the old toys in the garret. And though they
could not go out doors, they had fine fun and frolic under the roof of the
house, and made noise enough to frighten all the mice away, if there had
been any there.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

FINE TIMES UP STAIRS.


One Saturday in July the children had expected to take a ride with Abby
Mapes and her brother Mark. Mr. Mapes's man Sam was to drive the wagon,
and they were going to the "Silver Spring," as it was called, a beautiful
spring of water about three miles from Mr. Bondy's house, and not far
from Mark Mapes's uncle's, where the children were all expected to take
tea, and Sam was to bring them home by dark.

They had talked it over for several weeks; but at last, when the
long-looked for day came, rain came with it.

Rain was very good for the gardens, but not very good for visiting; and
the children had to stay at home disappointed.

They were very sorry they could not go, but they made no noise about it.
They tried to make the best of it. They hoped it might stop raining by
noon. They would still be in time, for they had not expected to start
before three o'clock.

But noon came without any signs of clear weather. So, after dinner, Mark
Mapes came over to say that his father would let Sam take them next
Saturday.

Before Mark went back, Alice, who had been for some time thinking how to
pass away the afternoon, went to her mother and whispered: "Shall I tell
Mark to ask Abby to come over here this afternoon and play with me?"

"You may, if you wish," replied her mother.

Alice ran to the door, which Mark had by this time reached on his way out,
and gave him her message for his sister.

As the house was only a short distance from Mr. Bondy's, Mark was soon
back again, trying, as best he could, to hold a big umbrella over Abby's
head. He felt very large, but he could not manage the umbrella very well.
He was only six years old, and hardly strong enough. Besides, his sister
was so much taller than he, that the points of the umbrella often caught
in her hood, and nearly tore it from her head.

They were hardly seated before Alice asked her mother if they might not
go up garret and play a while. She told them "Yes," and they all started
up stairs.

Alice and Maggie stopped a moment in the nursery to get some dolls and
other toys, while Abby took little Jimmie by the hand and helped him along.

When they reached the garret they were soon at their play. The old toys
were taken from the table, and, with the new ones, made enough to keep
them busy all the afternoon.

Mark and Jimmie found some little blocks, and had great sport in building
houses out of them, and knocking them down. They also took the cart with
one wheel and loaded it with their blocks, and amused themselves in
drawing the load from one end of the garret to the other.

The girls went to work at housekeeping. They had dishes, and pots, and
pans, some made of china, some of wood, and some of pewter. There were
hardly two whole ones in the lot. Nearly all were either cracked, or
broken, or bent.

Alice had a very nice set of china dishes, and Maggie had a set of smaller
ones, which had been given to them by Uncle Fred for their last Christmas
present. But these they kept on the corner stand in the parlor, and did
not very often use.

After a while the boys got tired of carrying blocks in a cart with only
one wheel, so they hunted around for something else.

They found some of the animals belonging to Noah's ark, and two or three
of the people. But whether Noah and his wife were among them I cannot say.

They also found a tin trumpet and a wooden whistle. The trumpet was bent,
and the whistle a little cracked; but still there was enough _squeak_ left
in them to make a noise. But such a noise! It sounded as if both trumpet
and whistle had been out in the rain, and had become hoarse with a cold.

Mark and Jimmie marched up and down the garret, making all the noise they
could, and scraping their feet across the floor. By and by they sat down
for a moment on a small trunk to rest.

When they rose from the trunk, Mark moved it a little with his foot. He
stooped to put it back in its place, and as he did so he saw something on
the floor behind it, and cried out:

"Hey! Jimmie, look here! Isn't this the wheel that belongs to the cart?"

As he said this, he picked up from the floor the missing wheel. How it
ever got behind the trunk I don't know; but there it was, and the boys
were not long in putting it on the axle.

Abby found a small nail on the floor, and put it in the end of the axle to
keep the wheel on. Then the old cart had two wheels, and did the work much
better than when it went dragging along with only one.

There was one very pretty thing that the girls brought up stairs to play
with, that I must tell you about. But I really do not know the name of it.
The lady who made it and gave it to Alice called it, I think, a _boudoir_.
What an odd name, isn't it! Can you pronounce it?

It was a little table about the size and shape of one half of a
dinner-plate, the back being straight, and the front round. It was made
of wood, and had three legs. The hind leg was put in the middle of the
straight back, and went up some distance from the top of the table, like
a pole.

The table and the pole were covered with blue muslin, which was neatly
fastened on the top of the table, and hung down like an apron all around.
A piece of the same also went from the top of the pole to the ends of the
back part of the table.

Then this blue muslin was all covered with white lace. Thus the table had
a lace top over it, a lace apron in front of it, and lace curtains hanging
from the top of the pole, and nicely fastened with ribbons at each corner
of the back.

On the pole, a short distance from the table, there hung a cunning little
looking-glass with a gilt frame.

There were several things on the table: a pincushion, a white china
wash bowl and pitcher, a square scent bottle, also of white china, with
something in it that smelled sweetly, and a tiny glass bottle of cologne
water.

It was really a beautiful toy, and all who saw it were well pleased with
it. Alice did not often play with it, but she saw it as she passed through
the nursery on her way up stairs, and thought it would be a nice thing to
take with her. It looked all the better in the garret, because there were
so many old, and broken, and ugly-looking things around it.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

SOMEBODY COMES TO SEE THEM.


Thus they played along for two or three hours, and had as good a time as
if the sun were shining, and they out in the garden.

The little dolls were dressed and undressed, put into the old broken
cradle, and taken out again, I don't know how many times. The _boudoir_
was set on one of the shelves I have told you about, and was looked at,
but was not handled much, for Alice was very careful of it. The plates and
dishes were put on the table and taken off, and put on again, and at last
all thrown together in a box under the table.

I forgot to tell you about the swing which Mr. Bondy had put up in the
garret for the children. It was a stout rope, and hung from the rafters,
where it was tightly fastened. An old cushion, which had once been on an
arm-chair, served as the seat.

When they were tired of their other plays they got on the swing; and when
they were tired of swinging they went back to their dolls and dishes, tin
trumpet and old cart.

By and by they became tired of the garret, and Alice said:

"Come, let's go down stairs again."

"Sister," said Maggie, "let's have one more swing."

"I want another swing, too," said Jimmie.

So on the swing they went again. They had not swung long before they heard
a step on the stairs.

"O," said Alice, "there comes father."

They were not afraid to have him come, for he often played with them, and
loved to see them enjoy themselves. He had come home from business earlier
than usual on account of the rain, and when he found that the children
were in the garret he went up to see them.

As soon as his head was seen above the garret floor, as he came up stairs,
Maggie cried out:

"O papa, come give me a swing, and tell me a story, and let me sit in your
lap!"

"Well, well, miss," said Mr. Bondy laughing, "I think you are asking a
great deal at once. I can't swing you, and hold you in my lap, and tell
you a story all at the same time."

"Well, swing me now," said Maggie, "and then tell me a story."

While Maggie was on the swing they were all startled by a singular noise
coming from the chimney. They had heard it when they first came up garret,
but it was not so loud. They would have gone down stairs then in fear, but
they waited a moment, and, as it did not come again, they went on with
their play and soon forgot it.

But now it became quite loud, and if Mr. Bondy had not been there they
would have all run down stairs. But they were not afraid while he was by.

It was a strange noise, and I can hardly tell you what it was like, unless
it was like something rolling down the chimney.

"What is that?" said Abby as she started toward the stairs.

Mr. Bondy smiled and said: "Don't be afraid, children, there is nothing
here to hurt you."

"But what made the noise, papa," said Alice.

"What would you think," said her father, "if I should tell you that the
noise is made by the folks that live in the chimney?"

"Folks in the chimney!" said Mark Mapes. "How could anybody live there?"

"O papa is only teasing us with one of his riddles," said Alice. "But
there, that's the same noise again. I wish I knew what made it."

"Perhaps," said Mr. Bondy, "the old folks have been out to market, and are
just coming home with something for the children to eat."

At this they all laughed. Presently Alice said: "O, I know what you mean!
There's a bird's nest there, and it's the old birds that make the noise
with their wings."

"How could little birds live in the chimney, I should like to know?" said
Maggie. "I should think the smoke would get in their eyes and drive them
out."

"But they do live there," said her father. "Alice has guessed right. There
is no doubt a nest of swallows somewhere in the chimney. The old birds go
out and get flies, and bring them to the little birds, who open their
mouths while the old ones drop them in."

"Isn't that funny," said little Jimmie, who had heard all that was said.

"Papa," said Maggie, "won't you tell us some more about the swallows?"

"Shall I tell you a swallow story?" he asked.

"O yes, do, do," all the children said.

"Then you must all sit down, and be very still."




CHAPTER V.

THE SWALLOW STORY.


Abby and Alice took a seat on an old trunk; Mark and Jimmie sat on the
floor; and Mr. Bondy got an old chair, with the back broken, and took his
seat on it, holding Maggie in his arms.

When they were all quiet he began:

"A little girl named Jane Clark once went with her mamma to visit her
grandma in the country. During the night Mrs. Clark was several times
wakened by strange noises about the chimney of the room where she slept.
But Jane was so tired that she slept too soundly to hear anything.

"Once Mrs. Clark sat up in bed as the noise came louder than usual, and
she saw, by the light of the night-lamp, a bundle of straw tumble down
from the chimney into the fireplace. The straw had been put into the
chimney, which was never used for a fire, to keep the cold wind from
blowing down.

"The noise now stopped, and Mrs. Clark went to sleep. Early next morning
Jane jumped out of bed, and as she touched the floor a little bird started
from a corner of the room, and flew frightened toward the window. But it
could not get through, for the window was shut.

"After flying all around the room until it was tired, the bird was caught
by Mrs. Clark, who let Jane hold it carefully in her hand.

"Its nest was near the top of the chimney, and somehow or other it had
fallen down during the night upon the straw which stopped up the chimney.
It tried to fly up again, but could not. Each time it tried it fell back
on the straw, until it loosened the bundle, which fell with it to the
floor.

"Mrs. Clark looked at it very carefully, but could not find any bruise
upon it. Jane at first wanted her mother to get a cage, and let her take
it home. But when her mother told her that the poor little thing would die
if shut up in a cage, Jane was willing to let it go.

"She took it again in her hand, and gently smoothed down the feathers on
its head and back. She then opened the window, and kissing it on its bill,
said: 'Go, little birdie, go, and find your nest again.' And the swallow
spread its little wings and soon was out of sight."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

COMING DOWN FROM THE GARRET.


"That was a pretty story, papa," said Maggie.

"Wont you tell us another?"

"Not this time, I guess, my child. But tell me: how would you like to live
in a chimney?"

The children laughed at this, and said that it was not possible.

"Well, then, how would you like to live in a garret?" asked Mr. Bondy.

Of course they none of them cared to do that.

"It would be too cold in winter," said Abby.

"And too hot in summer," said Alice.

"And too dark all the time," said Mark.

"I should be afraid of the rats and mice," said Maggie.

"I would shoot them with my gun," said Jimmie, who was very bold when
there were no rats and mice to be seen.

"But, my children," said Mr. Bondy, "there are many poor people who have
not as comfortable a place as this garret to live in. I have seen them
sometimes in a garret with no bed but a heap of shavings or straw to lie
on, and no covering but an old, ragged, and dirty quilt. The roof has been
leaky and the floor wet with snow or rain, and the wind blowing across the
garret, making every one shiver with the cold.

"O it is a sad sight to see a poor sick woman lying in such a place, and
dying for want of food, while her children are lying around her in rags,
and dirt, and cold, crying for bread which the mother has not to give.

"You ought to thank God, children, who gives you food, and clothing, and
kind friends, and a comfortable house to live in; and we ought to help the
poor and the sick all that we can."

The children felt sad when they heard about the poor who suffer thus, and
Alice said she was sure she would like to help them if there were any such
living near.

But by this time the rain had stopped. There was a little blue sky in
the west, and soon the golden sunshine came through the garret windows,
casting its pleasant light across the floor, and making the old toys and
broken furniture look brighter and better than they did when all was dark
and gloomy.

Presently the tea bell rang, and they hastened down stairs. They had
enjoyed a pleasant afternoon in spite of the rain. Perhaps, if the weather
had been fine, and they had gone to the Silver Spring, they might have had
a pleasanter time; but then, as Alice said at the tea-table,

"We should not have heard that story about the swallow, nor about the poor
people that suffer so much in the cold. I wish I could help them."

"Besides," said Abby, "we can all go to the Silver Spring next Saturday,
if it is pleasant; Sam will take us."

And so he did, for the next Saturday was a very fine day, and they all had
a grand time.

Thus they enjoyed two pleasant afternoons: one stormy one in the garret,
and one bright one by the Silver Spring.



                   THE END.


   [X]------------------------------------------[X]
    |           =SUNDAY-SCHOOL BOOKS.=           |
    |   CARLTON & LANAHAN, 805 Broadway, N. Y.   |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |            =THE GIANT-KILLER;=             |
    |    Or, the Battle which all must Fight.    |
    |         =Two Illustrations. 18mo.=         |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |                =ANNIE LEE=                 |
    |            And her Irish Nurse.            |
    |        =Three Illustrations. 18mo.=        |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |               =MINNIE RAY:=                |
    |      A Story of Faith and Good Works.      |
    |        =Four Illustrations. 18mo.=         |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |             =MARGARET CRAVEN;=             |
    |          Or, Beauty of the Heart.          |
    |        =Five Illustrations. 18mo.=         |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |             =A BOOK FOR BOYS.=             |
    |      Stories of Boys who won their way     |
    |      to Honor or Wealth by Obedience,      |
    |            Industry, and Piety.            |
    |        =Nine Illustrations. 18mo.=         |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |              =THE LOST KEY.=               |
    |       By the Author of "The Little         |
    |           Water-Cress Sellers."            |
    |        =Five Illustrations. 18mo.=         |
   [X]------------------------------------------[X]


   [X]------------------------------------------[X]
    |           =SUNDAY-SCHOOL BOOKS.=           |
    |   CARLTON & LANAHAN, 805 Broadway, N. Y.   |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |        =SUNDAY AMONG THE PURITANS;=        |
    |      Or, The first Twenty Sabbaths of      |
    |        the Pilgrims of New England.        |
    |            By Dr. W. A. Alcott.            |
    |                  =18mo.=                   |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |               =ROLAND RAND;=               |
    |   Or, God's Poor. By Mrs. C. M. Edwards.   |
    |        =Three Illustrations. 18mo.=        |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |              =CHRISTIAN LOVE=              |
    |   Contrasted with the Love of the World;   |
    |         in an Epistolary Narrative.        |
    |           By Mrs. M. H. Maxwell.           |
    |         =Two Illustrations. 18mo.=         |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |        =LONDON IN THE OLDEN TIME;=         |
    |   Or, Sketches of the English Metropolis,  |
    |     from its Origin to the End of the      |
    |             Sixteenth Century.             |
    |                  =18mo.=                   |
    |--------------------------------------------|
    |             =THE FARMER BOY;=              |
    |     Or, A Child of Providence led from     |
    |    the Plow to the Pulpit. With several    |
    |         Incidents of his Ministry.         |
    |        =Four Illustrations. 18mo.=         |
   [X]------------------------------------------[X]


Transcriber Note


Minor typos were corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Up in the garret, by Robin Ranger

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UP IN THE GARRET ***

***** This file should be named 63049.txt or 63049.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/0/4/63049/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Tom Cosmas and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

